mrnonucrmw. ix'

’ end, ho thought, of all these studies should bc to establish

- some clear grounds of human aetion.

ι 10. It=1follcwed naturally from thiatbat Cicero found the
greatest pleasure in ethieal studies; and to these lre has de·
voted two of his larger worlrs. The Dc Finibus, as was re·
marked above, contains a discussion of the idea ol the summam
bouum, and the Epicurean, Stoic, aud Peripatetie doctrines are
examined at length. The first of these is absolutely rejected ;¹
the doctrine that pleasure is the highest end ef human aetion
seems ιο the author absnrd aud utterly destructive of all
morality. No clear decision, however, is· reached in regard tc
the others; the Stoie doctrine that virtue is the only good
seems to him more sublime, but ho fears that it is animpossi·
ble one in praetiee;¹ at the same time, if we admit with tho
Peripatetico that anything cissis good in itself, he fears that
the foundation of morality may ba loss secura'· 'she differ·
enee in the end is very slight, one of words rather than of
substance, be says ; whether virtue isthe only good, or is good
beyond comparison with other things, is of no practical im-
portance.‘ One sees that, so long as the discussion is tbeo·
reticui, he has no clear convictiou.
· 11. In theDe Officiis the tone is in general quite different.
He chooscs here the Stoic system as a basis, because'it seems
to bim (ΙΙΙ. 4, 20) more elevated in tone3 and although claim·
ing at times the right of an Academia to change his opinions
and to select more probabis doctrines, yet lrc nowhere shows
any doubt in regard to· the foundation of morality and the
absolute nature 'of the good. The treatment of the subjectis -
thoroughly practical, the points chosen for discussion sneh as
would interest his son and be· nsefnl to him in ordinary and in
public lile. His large experience citha world and extensive
acquaintance with the political movements of the time land an
especial interest tc the *worls

After a brief introduct ion a general divisiones the subject

¹DsFin. 1. 7, 233311. 34,5.3 'DeFin IV. 9, 213 DeAm.
v..18 'TuseDisp.V..l Dsou 1113 11.

Aa

 

